## Project: Cloud Data Warehouse on Redshift
* Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

* Project Description
In this project, I have applied data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python.I have also defined fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

* Project Datasets
Worked with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

```
Input Data
Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

```

* Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

* Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

* Star Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, we need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

* Fact Table
1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
2. songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
* Dimension Tables
1. users - users in the app
2. user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
3. songs - songs in music database
4. song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
5. artists - artists in music database
6. artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
7. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
8. start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday 

* Files
The project template includes four files:

1. ```create_table.py``` is where we create the fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift.
2. ```etl.pyv``` is where we load data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into the analytics tables on Redshift.
3. ```sql_queries.py``` is where we define you SQL statements, which will be imported into the two other files above.
4. ```README.md``` is where we provide discussion on your process and decisions for this ETL pipeline.

* Steps
1. Designed schemas for the fact and dimension tables
2. Wrote a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py
3. Completed the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables
4. Wrote SQL DROP statements to drop tables in the beginning of create_tables.py if the tables already exist. 
5. Launched a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
6. Added redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.
7. Tested by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in the redshift database & used Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.
8. Built ETL Pipeline
9. Implemented the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
10. Implemented the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
11. Tested by running etl.py after running create_tables.py and running the analytic queries on the Redshift database to compare the results with the expected results.
12. Deleted the redshift cluster when finished.


## Example Functions
```
def drop_tables(cur, conn):
    ''' 
    Drop existing tables    
    
    cur: Cursor
    conn: Connection information to redshift using credentials
    queries as in sql_queries.py file       
    '''    

    for query in drop_table_queries:
        cur.execute(query)
        conn.commit()


def create_tables(cur, conn):
    ''' 
    create tables    
    
    cur: Cursor
    conn: Connection information to redshift using credentials
    queries as in sql_queries.py file       
    '''    
    for query in create_table_queries:
        cur.execute(query)
        conn.commit()
def load_staging_tables(cur, conn):
    ''' 
    ETL to load the staging tables
    
    cur: Cursor
    conn: Connection information to redshift using credentials
    queries as in sql_queries.py file       
    '''    
    for query in copy_table_queries:
        cur.execute(query)
        conn.commit()

def insert_tables(cur, conn):
    ''' 
    ETL to insert data in the tables
    
    cur: Cursor
    conn: Connection information to redshift using credentials
    queries as in sql_queries.py file       
    '''    
    for query in insert_table_queries:
        cur.execute(query)
        conn.commit()
```